In ..
算 iawn.
Rhaid i ni deammollinkydd,
hwn yn 22 o Og Wellian 2019.
OndWhen I'd Ask那个5?
Edna Mae Henry.
Rhaid онn i knights minhawn Greetings,ỏiion newydd di wneudfan g prof verschiedenen.
yn St Catherine, Jamaica.
O'r dydd?
Beth oedd yw'r dydd?
31.
31?
Felly, 31.
31.
Beth oedd angen eich ffrindiau?
Mae'n angen eich ffrindiau yw Eliza Jones.
A'ch enw eich ffrindiau?
Ebenees Henry.
Felly, oedd oedd o'n bwrdd yn 31.
Ie.
Beth oedd angen eich ffrindiau pan oeddwch chi'n mynd yn ystod ystod y tîm?
Mae'n angen eich ffrindiau.
Nid oedd yn hollol fel y tîm.
Ie.
Roeddwn i'n mynd i'r ystod a'n...
Beth ystod oedd yn mynd i'r ystod?
Ystod yna, York Street.
Ystod, ystod y dîm, oherwydd ein bod yn...
Rwy'n bwynt iawn, ystod York Street.
Ie. Beth oedd yn oed yn oed pan oeddwch chi'n mynd i'r ystod?
Roedd yn oed iawn.
Mae'n oed bach.
Roedd angen y tîm i ffrindiau o ran y tîm yn Jamaica.
Eh.
Mae angen y tîm yn ddiddordeb?
Ie, mae angen y tîm yn ddiddordeb.
A oedd oedd angen angen angen anwyd a anwyr?
Nid, na, ma'n angen anwyd a anwyr ond mae o'n angen dri brif.
A gallwch chi dda?
Leonard Hurd, Calvin, Mackenzie a Winston.
Felly, ydych chi'n dda? O'r mwyaf o'r mwyaf? O'r mwyaf yn y ffordd?
Ddynol i'r mwyaf.
Who's the oldest?
Leonard Hurd.
And who's the next?
Calvin.
And then?
Then you.
Me.
And the youngest one is?
Western.
OK. And that's all of you. Did you live in a big house when you were in Jamaica?
Well, what would I call it? Two bedroom, a veranda.
And what do you call it? With a little.
Two bedroom and a dining room.
Right.
Yeah, and a veranda.
Did you live in one of those houses where you could sit in the evening on the veranda?
Yes, yes, veranda, yeah.
OK. So once you went to school and everything, that was junior school, did you go to what I used to call big school after that?
No, no, no. But after that I went to a private school to further my education.
OK. Where was that?
It was a church school I went to and a place named Jericho.
What was that like?
Jericho in St Catherine, but the place is named Jericho.
OK. What was the school like there?
Well, it was just like adults, not, you know, not.
How old were you when you went there?
When I left school.
OK. So when you left school then?
Yeah, when I left school I went to a sewing place, you know, when teachers, school parents send their children to learn to sew. I went there, yeah.
The boys went to Lerne Tree, didn't they?
Yeah, they have a place named Tintill for the boys. But my father sent me to a school.
I went to a lady that teaches sewing.
Right, OK.
What were your parents like growing up? Were they strict or were they lenient? Were they hardworking? Were they millionaires?
Oh, my father and my mother were hardworking.
What did they do for a living?
Well, my mother, well I have to say, left me when I was small. She went to town after she had her.
Town just means castle?
To work, yeah. But my father, I always with my father and he was hardworking, used to do like little farming, gave cows pigs goats.
Did you help him with those?
Pardon?
Did you help him?
Only in the morning with the milk. Yeah, I would take the milk and come back.
So it was a happy time for you in the middle of it?
Yeah, it was a happy time for me, yeah.
So what was your decision to come to Britain then? What happened?
Well, my decision, my brother was in the RF and after the war he came out and then, you know, he decided, he came back home, bucked for it and he sent for me.
Right, and when was that? What year was that? Roughly, how old were you do you think?
I was 29 when I came here.
29?
Yeah.
Okay, so that would have been about?
61.
I came here 61.
Yeah, okay. So your brother?
He was in the army.
Yeah.
RF.
So where did he live at that time?
He was living in, when I came here he was living in Grangetown.
Grangetown, so you came straight from Jamaica?
To Grangetown.
Grangetown.
Okay, how did you come? Was it plane, was it boat?
I came on the plane.
On the plane?
Yeah.
Was it BOAC?
Yeah, yeah.
BOAC, 1961.
Okay, so you must have been Heathrow then, is it?
No, I think it was Gatwick.
Gatwick, okay. And did he come and get you?
He met me at the end of the, after I came off the plane we had like a train and he met me at the end.
Okay, and then he drove you back to?
And take me to Cardiff.
Cardiff, okay. So you're in Cardiff now, you've got to get a job.
Well I had a job, when I came to Cardiff I got straight to a job.
When my brother took me over he would already know somebody and I had a job.
So you had a job to come to?
Yes, I had a job to come to, yeah.
What job was that?
Well, I was in St. Davies Hospital but I was working in the laundry part.
My mother worked in the laundry and went to hospital in England.
So what was that like, was that okay?
Well, well.
Did you encounter any difficulties when you first came?
Well, not, ah.
It's only me and you talking, you can tell us.
No, ah. Well, you know when you work with some of the people I've been asking you stupid questions if you have a horse and things like that, that where you come from.
But my difficulty now when I left my brother and when I was in Ely and that was my greatest hell that I ever had.
In Ely?
In Ely.
Why, why, I don't know Cardiff that well, so what's the matter with Ely?
Well, my neighbour, I don't know what's wrong with him, whether he didn't like blocks or what, but what it is, but we can be happy.
What happened?
Well, he used to pick on the children then.
And they couldn't go outside and when my friend come over he pick on them and the wife, it was horrible.
And I wake up one morning and when I looked out at the back of my kitchen, as though she used whether the bucket or what it is, she just threw the mess at the back.
Oh, excrement and all that sort of stuff.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Oh my goodness.
And when I go to work and come back it's always complaining.
Yeah.
And, but then after a while my other brother that was here, his children, heard about it and I didn't know what was going on.
But then the police came over and asked me to stop him from, stop my neighbour from coming because of all the hustling I was having.
They were a boxer and everybody know them as a boxer.
But to work together he said that they were coming to take him out of his house and beat him up.
But I didn't know nothing about it.
So, well, it calmed down a bit.
But then the councilors that I have, everything, you know, you want this to be done and you want that to be done.
And I always pay my money in advance, pay them all.
And I couldn't, I just couldn't take it anymore.
But then I was short cash.
But one day I was in the house and my, my, I let her come through the door.
I think it was a rebate of 250 pounds.
So I put it, I take it down to Wilson Road and I said I'm going to put this money down.
So I, and then when I came from, yeah, I was working in the hospital, Ely hospital.
I was doing nursing in Ely hospital.
What year was this now?
This is about 62-ish, is it?
63?
No, that's right.
You were here?
70s.
70s, o'n i, 70s.
I said I'm going to put this little cash down.
I didn't know what I was going to do with it, but I started to, you know, when I get my wages and what I have left, I try to put a couple pounds down and see.
And we were in work and all the girls then were talking and they said, oh, I'm going to buy a house.
And I said, and then because I couldn't get no repair and he couldn't, that fellow wouldn't lay off my back.
I said, well, when the law came out that you could buy your consulat, but I didn't want to live there.
You didn't want to live there?
No, I didn't want to live there because I write to the MP telling the condition of everything.
And well, anyhow, I go back to my, I didn't, I say to my other, to my eldest brother,
that I'm going to buy a house.
And he said yes.
Well, at that time you could pay the solicitor, but I have bought a thousand pounds.
And he took me and I saw the house didn't beat the road anymore.
My brother word was said, I saw one first and he said, no, don't have that one.
And his word was I step out in style.
So I went and I had no, no, I moved to be the road.
I left the house and I moved to be the road.
I had the house and at that time I think that was my happiest time.
So how far is, what was it, Peter Road?
Beedar Road.
Beedar Road?
That's in Canton.
So it's a totally different area then.
Yeah, yeah.
So what was it like in Beedar Road?
Oh, it was lovely. It was nice.
Was it a modern house?
No, it was one of those, there were pre-war houses, but it was big.
It was a really big family house.
It's our conservative dream.
It's, you know, we have like three homes downstairs, a lounge, then there's like a dining room, and then there's another room there and then you have conservative.
So it's like two lounge area, double lounge, dining room, kitchen.
So it's quite a big house then really, wasn't it?
Yeah.
It's quite a big house.
Yeah, it's a poor bedroom.
Did you ever see that guy again?
Did he ever apologise? Did anything ever come of it? Did the authorities do anything about the way you were living?
They didn't do nothing.
Did you report it?
Yeah, because it was the police that came over and told us when we were in England, told me about what was going to happen, because I did put in for an exchange, but they wouldn't give it to me.
Okay. Okay, well, you know when you got the job at the hospital?
Yeah.
What was life like in the hospital when you did work?
It was alright. It was okay.
That was okay.
Yeah, it was okay. It was okay. Yeah.
So your start off in Wales then was, it was mixed then, because in work it was okay, but at home it was bad.
And then you got this new house, so work is okay now, and home is okay.
Yeah, yes.
So what did you do for leisure time? Did you have any children then?
Yes, yeah.
So the kids had come over then, is it?
No, over here, over here. She came over.
Yeah. And how many children did you have over here?
Four, five.
Four?
Yeah, four.
Four.
Okay. And they were born from about 1960?
1960.
1962.
Yeah.
Through to about 1970 or so.
Yeah, 1971.
Okay. Okay. So you were working mother and trying to make ends meet. What about your husband? How did he react to everything?
Well, he's the person that worked all over the place.
What did he do?
He was an engineer. He used to work with Vauxhall and things like that, so he worked all over different areas. He never was in Cardiff.
So we had to, my mum, literally, I could take my heart out to my mum because she was a mum and dad in every way.
She made sure that we were well kept, fed, clothed, we had clean homes, everything.
I take my heart out to her because there's not many women I could, I wouldn't know that would do what my mum had done and put up with all the hassle.
She'd break her heart when she'd see people hurt their children. It was really, really hard. It was very hard.
I mean, when I came here, I came over a very bright child and yet I was put down to the lowest of the lowest class because they think that I was stupid.
We'll get to that when you take us there.
Yeah, yeah.
So, okay, so then what happened? Did you get promotion in work?
Well, no.
No.
Okay, so did you spend all your time in the linen room?
Well, yes, I spent 23 years in the hospital.
23 years?
Yes, in the hospital, yeah.
Okay.
Yeah.
Have you, what do you think of Wales? Do you see Wales as your home or do you still think of yourself as Jamaican?
Well, sometimes I think about Jamaica and another time I think, say, well, stay here.
So if you had the chance, say you won a million pounds or something like that, would you stay here or would you go back to Jamaica?
I think I would go back.
You would go back to Jamaica?
Yeah, because I would have enough to survive.
Yes, yeah, yeah.
Okay.
Yeah, yeah.
So have you been back to Jamaica since the time you left?
Oh, yes, several times.
Several times. What do you think of it?
Well, I think Jamaica is nice if you have money.
Yeah.
It's nice if you have money.
Has it changed since, it must have changed, but do you think Jamaica has changed for the better or do you think it's worse than when you left?
Well, I think it's worse than really that one I left because, you know, when people appreciate you more when you was out there than now.
Right, okay.
Yeah.
What do you do for leisure time now over here?
Well, I go to church and…
Is church a big part of your life?
Yeah.
How long have you been going to church?
Well, I go to church every week. I go to the Pentecostal church.
When did you start going to church?
Oh, a long time ever since when I was in Ely.
But then when I moved down, it was a bit distant to go and then after I go to the Pentecostal.
Okay, and that plays a big part of your life.
Yes.
How often do you go? Once a week?
No, we go twice a week.
What do you do in church?
Well, sometimes they want you to say a bit of word, exaltation, and then I don't really want to part with it because I'm too old now.
Okay, but you just like…
Socialise.
Yes, church is not just to go there and worship, is it? So church is almost like a gathering.
Yes.
And there's a gathering.
Because nearly every Caribbean people, no matter which Caribbean country they come from, there's a church in their life somewhere, isn't there?
Yes.
Okay, so that's your leisure time as church. Do you do anything else?
My mum loves crochet.
Oh, see, you didn't tell me that.
I used to do a lot of sewing.
Did you?
But I don't bother with it now. Bad eyes now. I don't. And the price that I'm going to pay for material in this…
You can't be bothered with it now.
It's cheaper.
What has been the highlight since you've been here? Is this something you could point to and say, yes, this was my best time?
Well, I don't really… I really don't. Because the thing is, when I'm working, I don't go anywhere, like I said, just from work.
Work to home, work to home.
Yes. I used to be like seven in the morning until eight in the night, so when I come home…
But that's why you came here, I suppose, isn't it? To work, because there's hardly any work when you left Jamaica, was there? There wasn't that much work, was there?
No, no, there wasn't that much work.
O.C. Felly, yna, os ydych chi'n mynd i ddod o'r ffrindiau o heddiw, rhyw ffrindiau o beth y byddwch chi'n dysgu, beth y byddwch chi'n ddod?
Wel, rydw i'n ddod, rydw i'n ddod, y mlynedd o'r ffrindiau, fy mhysg, y byddwn i'n cael yma.
Yn ogystal â beth ydych chi'n dweud, beth yw'r bwyd y gallech chi ddod?
Wel, fy bwyd ychydig yn ogystal â beth yw'r bwyd y gallech chi ddod, pan oeddwn i'n gwych, roeddwn i'n fwy hapio yn y Carrabyn.
Mae'n fwy hapio.
Diolch yn fawr.